I'm not very used to this, and you might find it doesn't make much sense when you listen to it again.
I suppose if you're digitizing the whole lot all at once by one method, the method itself goes out of date.
You've got to re-digitize, transfer it from
hypertext, supertext, or superhypertext, or postmodernist hypertext, whatever.
You will find yourself having to redo the whole lot.
That's right.
And what they're also finding today is, we know the paper lasts a long time.
Some paper lasts forever.
Other paper doesn't.
Exactly.
Now we have, there's just a public broadcasting special
in the United States, a lot of the data that has been retrieved from space and these missions to the planet, it's not even 10 years old.
But it's preserved on magnetic tapes, which is already degrading.
It's already inaccessible.
Yes, magnetic tapes degrade very rapidly.
I know that from having looked after an oral history collection once.
And this was done in the primitive days of oral history, and some of it in little dictaphone reels from office tape recorders and that sort of thing.
never re-recorded, and it was impossible to find the equipment to do it on.
So the same happens electronically as well.
Now if you, pardon me, but anyway, that's just kind of an introduction, but I know that your background also, you recently moved here to this facility.
If you could tell us a little bit about your own background.
I moved here from working for part of the Bodleian Library in Oxford.
I was there for 11 years.
That was Rhodes House Library, the American and Commonwealth section, specializing in U.S.
history and government, Commonwealth history and government, and in Commonwealth archives as well, because my own background was originally as an archivist rather than as a librarian.
But I moved gradually into printed book work and... Interesting.
Would you say that I also want to define a difference in this new book?
the difference between an archivist and a librarian.
How would you... Well, I was concerned with historic manuscript records, rather than with the current archives of an ongoing institution.
And what we were looking after in Oxford were the papers of British colonial administrators all over the world, and several organizations that
that have been concerned with either missionary, some with commercial, some with political life in the British colonial possessions.
But before that I was in Edinburgh at the National Library of Scotland, and there I was looking after mainly 19th century documents, literary papers including Sir Walter Scott, Thomas Carlyle,
Carlisle's been a theme throughout my life.
I mean, looking after his papers there, the last thing I did when I left Edinburgh was to put on a Carlisle centenary exhibition to mark the centenary of his death, and found that at that stage I was looking at some of his correspondence about the foundation of the London Library without having any idea that I would end up looking after Carlisle's
looking after the library, which looks to Carlisle as a founder.
At the same time, I was interested in the origins of the Bloomsbury group.
I wrote a book about, well edited, the unpublished autobiography of Leslie Stephen in the late 1970s.
And that's come home to roost as well because Stephen was one of our most prominent 19th century presidents here at the London Library.
So he's been another theme.
throughout my life, linking to different institutions.
We'll leave the matter of the Archivist, but there are certain missions.
I mean, the Archivist is not so much concerned with provenance and matters of books and editions, but in terms of preservation and bringing all of these things together.
There is a different attitude, I think, between
What a librarian does, and what a librarian does.
Yes, there's a different attitude, but I think at the research level that I was involved in it, the distinction wasn't as marked as it might be, say, in a local historical collection, that sort of thing, because we were dealing with the documents of major Scottish figures in Edinburgh.
I never saw the distinction as marked as the two professions tend to feel.
I think I totally agree.
I'm treating them similarly.
I mean, the mission is to gather, protect, and pass on.
Last month I was at the Archive of the Indies in Seville.
You were just mentioning colonial papers that you were dealing with.
Is there a formal repository in the UK that...
that gathers the British adventures abroad?
Well, that was at Rhodes House, partly.
There is the Public Record Office, the National Archives, dealing with the government of these territories.
But this was about people who'd served there.
And we'd rather split the responsibilities between the India Office Library, now part of the British Library, but previously part of the
well, the India office itself, which then became part of the British Foreign Service Library.
And that is now part of the British Library.
It is the major source for the British experience of India.
And from an African and other territories point of view, particularly strong in Africa, in the 1950s, with the winding down of empire and the
forthcoming independence, they decided to systematically collect from former colonial service officials their own private papers, diaries, letters home, and other collections, to bring those together in Oxford.
And I was the inheritor of this great effort, which was still continuing 30 years later.
Of course, this particular institution is... there are institutions that aspire to be like it, but it is unique, I think we have to say.
It's unique in the way it's developed, but in its origins it wasn't unique.
It's very belated as a subscription library.
When Thomas Carlyle came to London, was working on his big biography,
and French Revolution, Frederick the Great, Cromwell book, particularly the Cromwell book.
He was frustrated by the poor service he was getting from the then British Museum, collections of printed books.
He couldn't get access to the books on the shelves, certainly couldn't borrow them, had difficulty getting adequate access to the catalogue, which wasn't at that stage the great printed catalogue that Finizzi put in.
put into action.
He was very frustrated by the service he was getting in Bloomsbury, where, of course, the round reading room hadn't been built, and he just didn't like the temperature, the other readers, the service he was getting from the... And he was somebody who was not one to let any grievances go untrumpeted.
But he was sufficiently established in London literary life to be able to gather together a committee of literary people, sometimes with political.
Gladstone was one of his early committee members.
It was Educated London Society whom he brought together to try and establish a library of serious literature.
of a sort that Carlisle had known in Scotland, in Edinburgh, but which existed already in many English provincial cities.
And a considerable number of these libraries still continue this.
The Leeds Library, the Portico Library in Manchester, the Literary and Philosophical Library in Newcastle-on-Tyne, which is, in the sense, my own formative library.
It's one I used when I was a teenager.
and then as a student at Cambridge, I used to go to Newcastle from my home nearby to use that, and that was established I think early 1820s.
We are now the largest by far, in some ways the most prosperous, but we are the youngest of this.
London itself didn't, until we were founded in 1841,
have the same facilities.
And we've developed from there the equivalents in the United States.
And some of the remaining independent libraries are tiny, not quite as old as, say, the Redwood at Newport or the Providence Athenaeum, which continue in very different ways.
I've visited them both and given talks there.
But our real equivalent there, I suppose, is the Boston anthem there.
I read it, the Boston anthem.
Yes.
Well, that is different from us in many ways.
I mean, they've got much more splendid buildings.
They've got works of art there.
They've got historic collections of national importance.
I mean, you know, the big section, segment of...
of Washington's library.
We don't have that.
But their books tend to be in beautiful condition, however much the director despairs of their condition.
I mean, here our own collections have been much more heavily used and are showing it, and that's one difference.
But in spirit, we're rather the same.
But to go back to Carlisle, in the 1840s, what he was after was a
A library that would have serious literature, as he put it.
I mean, that is not the same stock as the circulating libraries, which were essentially loan facilities for three-decker novels and for light literature.
Here he was looking for more serious material.
And it would build, it would accumulate a great store of serious knowledge, which would be accessible to readers,
and in the sense of being browsable and borrowable.
And these two aspects of the founder's wishes have been in our minds ever since.
And although we've got round about a million volumes here, at least 90% of them are on open shelves.
And they are arranged on a simple system.
I come back to that in due course, which means that
They're in broad subject groups, alphabetically arranged within those groups.
And it's possible to do a great deal of what might be called associative browsing.
You can actually go there.
A lot of people don't use our subject catalogues.
They prefer to look on the shelves.
You go to a look, look for a simple book, a single book by an English author on a particular theme.
You'll find alphabetically near it a French one.
obviously more recent, more authoritative, that you perhaps didn't know existed.
And that sort of browsing is very good.
I'll continue with this, if you'd like.
I like this.
This is all part of the accessibility of it.
Every now and again, we get some sort of PC trouble over, we've got a section called women, which comes between, as it were, wine and yachting.
And people think this is demeaning in some way.
Well, it's not.
Once you see what's there, I mean, there's the whole of what the Victorians regarded as the woman question, I mean, works of John Stuart Mill, and it goes up to Susan Sontag and people like that, all in one alphabetical sequence.
And the way you can do sort of mental cross-referencing, browsing there, is very good indeed.
And that's, I mean, it's been kept up consistently over the years.
Wine, for example, is not.
I mean, we haven't collected systematically there, and of course wine
is now a matter of scholarship rather than just of miscellaneous information.
So, looking there, it's higgledy-piggledy.
But under the women question, it's actually, historiographically, quite a major accumulation.
And I think Carlyle would have approved of that, and I think his wife would, too.
But that's one aspect of accessibility.
That would be lost with the computer cataloging.
No, it isn't.
I mean, the ability to do associative browsing is going to be seriously... No, no, no, because this is the arrangement of books on the shelves, not the arrangement of books in the catalogue.
So I think we're probably going to change to Library of Congress subject headings rather than our own local system, which has gone on for over a century.
But it's much easier to browse by this international standard, looking up once you get to know the necessary keywords for searches.
But the arrangement of books on the shelves, we'd like to change some of them, but some of these subject headings for the shelving of the books, we just don't have the room at the moment, because we're absolutely full.
I'll come back to that later.
But I'll just finish on accessibility, because the other thing is that we're a lending library.
It has its disadvantages, as I mentioned when we first met,
that you can't guarantee that the books are actually on the shelves.
And if you're doing your browsing nearly by what you expect to find on the shelves, you're subject to a lot of disappointment.
But we lend out our books in quite considerable periods, so long as people renew them.
They could have them out, possibly for the duration of a biographical project or whatever, maybe the background reading essential for a historical
novel or something like that.
And with these liberal terms, members living in London, their basic subscription entitles them to 10 books at a time.
Living in the country, it's 15 books at a time.
And by paying a surcharge on the subscription, you can actually borrow, it gets progressively more expensive, but you can actually borrow up 40 books at a time and have them out for long periods.
People do get possessive of them or they get onto their own shelves and it's difficult to
extricate them from the more adhesive sort of members.
But this liberal lending policy is very good for the encouragement of research or in-depth reading.
Not necessarily that by which I mean reading in depth and not geared by the requirements of either academic research
for degrees or for actual publications.
We've got a lot of writing members as well.
We've got a lot of writing members.
We've got even more reading members.
But the corollary of this liberal lending policy is that we rely on members to return books immediately after the initial lending period is over if somebody else wants it.
And we like to have those books back very quickly.
So we've got the sort of honor system.
It's very difficult to compel in that way, but as I well know, because I think the difficult cases when books get stuck with one member and another is paying for them, they end up on the librarian's desk and some difficult telephone calls have to be made or letters awkward to write have to be sent.
So that is how we are operating in the Carlisleian way of offering good browsing and good borrowing.
And there's also now the possibility, the probability, in the next few months, we've at last got the electronic infrastructure in place so that we can allow our readers to do online searches of our own, the modern parts of our catalogue.
That's from 1984 onwards.
And I'm pretty sure that Carlisle himself, had he known of this, would have been one of the very first to get a modem in Cheney Row for his own little study there.
Do we have little rooms for writers to... We don't.
As you'll see, we've only got the main reading room.
There are reading tables.
working tables in the book stacks in various places.
Some people read there.
A lot of people just seem to squat on the floor and get all their references together.
But the reading room itself, as you will see, it's got about 20 tables for a single or a couple of people at them, and it can get very busy.
A lot of our
Well, there are a noticeable number of people in that reading room who come here very regularly, sometimes daily, and do their writing there.
They regard it, in a way, as their writing office.
I'm not going to be naming particular names, but, you know, there are... I can think of two novelists who had different careers, academic careers, who actually came here and wrote their fictional works.
works of fiction, in the reading room, because it was so different from working in their faculty office or their university library.
And these people who were still actively writing?
Yes, actively writing.
And so they used this as an alternative place, because we look like a club in various ways, as the Athenaeum does in Boston, but we are not a club.
We don't have any social facilities at all, we don't, unlike the Ateneum in Boston, we don't give lectures there.
We've got no coffee room, and so it is, there's an ancient notice in the reading room just saying silence is requested, and that's normally obeyed.
You can guarantee that you're not going to be disturbed there.
So, you know, literary people with obviously prominent figures can actually come to the library and nobody's going to disturb them and bother them about what's their next book, how much they enjoyed the last one.
And don't you think you should be writing about such an interesting subject?
They can get away from that.
That's not going to happen.
That's not going to happen here.
We don't have an education program.
We've got one lecture a year, which is quite an innovation.
In our 150th anniversary year, 1991, before I was here, we had a series of lectures about the history of the library.
They were very well attended and we thought this was a good idea.
So each year we have a single lecture which is attended by anything between about five and seven hundred people.
We have to take one of the largest lecture halls in London which is at the Royal Geographical Society and we can fill it with over seven hundred.
What is the size of the membership?
The membership is now, it seems to have come out at a plateau of between eight and eight and a half thousand.
Slight fluctuations in that.
It's growing at the moment by about ten or twelve a month.
So it's a very gradual growth.
We don't need to advertise.
We've got a form of application which has on it
You've got to provide a reference, we've got to satisfy ourselves of people's bona fides, but we're very much open in that way because we are a recognised charity and it would impair our charitable status if we were asking people to be proposed and seconded as if we were a social club.
But we've got to satisfy ourselves about bona fides and so we ask for a reference which should be of somebody of
pompous phrase that I devised myself of readily verifiable standing.
And this is because, you know, we practically, oh, I think it's about 80% of those who join the library do so on the recommendation of existing members of the library.
So we're spread by word of mouth in that way.
We're not advertising.
And, of course, the...
We've grown in that way, and the membership used 30 years ago to be about 5,000, and then it was in danger of becoming 7,500, and people thought the reading room was going to be crowded and it would overload us in various ways.
They never all come at once, of course, but on the other hand it would just mean that there were more people about.
much more use of the library.
So they, for a very short time, put up a waiting list.
You had to, you know, they capped the membership at 7,500, and that was pretty disastrous because a lot of dormant members, you know, who just paid their subscription, didn't use as much, wrote in very guiltily and said, I didn't realise I was keeping out for a student and that sort of thing, I must resign immediately.
And so the figures dropped and sort of stabilized at that.
But there's been a sort of legend ever since for the last 15 years or so that we have a waiting list and we're exclusive in that way.
But it's possible to join within a week of application, possibly shorter.
And that's been something that we've
Continued very nicely.
We can't really analyze the people who are coming in.
I've looked through, and that entire wall in my office is the application forms going back to the 1870s.
And I've sampled these at different times.
And it's awfully difficult to work out.
I mean, these go back to the time where it says profession, and people put down spinster.
But now, people will put themselves down not
as sort of researcher or writer or author when they haven't written or at least haven't published anything.
And what they're really interested in is reading.
And what I would like to do is find out the number of people who rely on us for reading.
Reading for pleasure, reading for information, rather than for writing.
And that's quite a distinction to make.
And it's almost impossible to work out from our
Membership.
Applications.
I'm going to have a chapter in my book on reading, so that is... Yes.
Yes.
You must have some pretty extraordinary... Those are the original applications?
These are the original applications.
So wouldn't you expect to see Virginia Woolf in here someplace?
You'd find Virginia Woolf.
Anybody would have, picking it up and knowing something about British social and literary life in the last century and a half, you would...
you'd be able to find something resonant, you know, just turning the pages.
Do you mind if I take a photograph of that wall?
You could, yes.
It's pretty messy at the moment.
Oh, I like it, actually.
One of your members is fearful that you might be moving.
No, we took the decision to remain on this site.
The door you came in by is in a narrow facade, which was the site of an 18th century nobleman's run-down townhouse.
And they extended all the way to Duke Street, to the west, into Mason's Yard, the Meuse at the north.
by buying up little plots here and there.
And the great thing about this site is that it is freehold.
We're not subject to getting out at the end of some enormously long lease of 999 years.
We actually own the site we're on.
And the site itself, were we to move, would be very valuable.
But as we are a listed building, there are all sorts of planning restrictions on
developing the site, and parts of the building, including the original iron frame book stacks, are specially listed.
So it's almost impossible to convert it for any other use, even though it could become a big corporate headquarters like our neighbours.
And we've got a private bank, the private banking service of the Australia and New Zealand bank on one side, and the headquarters of the clerical medical insurance company on the other.
And we're on good terms with them, but it's improbable, ultimately not impossible that they might move, but it would be very difficult for us to afford to buy the huge buildings on either side.
So it does preclude them.
And you also said that you're full, you have a million books and you have no books, so what's the... Well, we have some spaces, but we have no space.
If I can put it like that, I mean, there are gaps.
which in certain sections will allow for the expansion of the collections.
But they're in a sense in the wrong places because there are some grossly congested parts which are already full.
And at the time we were able to expand by putting on additional book stacks on the perimeter of the building because unfortunately we can't, as you'll see when we go around, we can't actually
Expand upwards in the core of it and there are there's a light well in the middle here actually in the lowest part of it at the moment which That light well and if we filled it we would impair the Rights to light of a big apartment block to them to the west and it would be awfully difficult because we'd have to drive piles through our main book stack to support any further floors and
So we put the whole thing out of action, the whole library, or the core of the library, out of action for probably two years or so, and it would be almost impossible to continue our services in that way.
Now in Boston at the Athenaeum, they have acquired an adjoining building.
Oh, yes.
I'll tell you, when your machine's off, I'll tell you one of Rodney Armstrong's stories about that.
I'd love to hear that.
But that's the sort of thing where, you know,
It happened at the Morgan Library as well, where they had the headquarters of the Lutheran Church in the corner, good neighbors who unexpectedly decided to move off to somewhere like Scranton, New Jersey, and leaving this building, which they hoped for.
remotely.
It was, you know, a pipe dream except that you can't smoke in the morgue, I might remember.
And were able to, you know, they were able to raise the money, and about twice as much money in half the time they allowed themselves to do so.
So something like that might happen here one day.
But even so, I think we're finding that the overcrowded parts of this institution where
Shelves have books lying horizontal on top.
So it means that some sections are not 100% full, they're actually 110% full because of these extra books.
It's concentrating our mind on the necessity of some sort of stock control, deaccessioning material.
That is not losing titles, but sometimes losing superfluous copies.
Because over the years,
volumes particularly in demand have been duplicated.
That demand has gone, and if we've got three sets of the two-volume biography of a Victorian bishop, say, which was of interest in all sorts of ways when it was published and afterwards, is now of particular interest only to ecclesiastical historians.
We can manage quite well with, if we've got three sets, we can manage easily with two.
probably with one.
And so reducing that in that way is an expensive job because it requires high knowledge or high professional, no, it requires the discrimination and judgment of very senior staff because there are all sorts of exceptions to this rule.
so that not every duplicate could be disposed of.
And there's a very good case for continuing.
And multiple editions of out-of-date works of popular science, for example.
These are samples that we've come across recently.
Out-of-date legal encyclopedias, which might have some sort of research interest in a specialist law library.
There's no point in our keeping three and a half shelves full of an out-of-date specialist encyclopedia.
There would be for this, say, the Britannica, where we've got many older editions because the treatment of the subject in a general encyclopedia is a matter of considerable interest the way it developed.
So with these in mind, we are about to start a discreet
stock audit.
Stock audit.
How would you spell it?
S-T-O-C-K.
Of the book stock.
Just assessing it with a view to pruning it and reducing the... Pruning it is the word they use at Harvard.
They don't like to say they weed.
No, no.
Audit is a term that... Weeding suggests you're actually eradicating certain things.
What we want to do, as I said, I don't intend to lose any title, but we would like to take out superfluous copies, and I've been walking around the stacks with one of my very senior colleagues who is in charge of the circulation section, the reader services bit of the issues and returns of books, and has a very good sense of
what is really wanted.
And we went around, we spent a lot of time together there, and have come to much the same conclusion.
So there is no threat here of deaccessioning a book, even though it perhaps has not been read in 50 years.
No.
Well, we can monitor this in various ways, because 25 years ago,
we started using a different sort of issue label and putting a date stamped adhesive label in the front of the books.
It is amazing how many older books that we can guarantee, because they don't have this label, go out each week.
They're probably putting a fresh label into a book that hasn't been out for 25 years.
Is this just a separate track and see how many of them are used?
Well, we can do this.
I can't remember what the figures are, but there will certainly be 20 or 30 books a week that haven't been used in a considerable period of time.
Yes, and are now going out.
And there are sections that have been dormant for a long time.
I mean, we've had a good deal of serious fiction, and we've got a good fiction section, huge in English, but also
French, German, Russian, etc.
I can come on to the Foreigner Collections later if you'd like.
But late 19th century fiction has, except for the major authors, has been pretty much in the doldrums as a subject of academic study until about ten years ago.
Now we're getting a lot of applications from people doing master's degrees at newer universities which don't have large libraries.
And if they've got large libraries are not well stocked in
late 19th century women's fiction, which is one of the great boom subjects.
There are booms in things like gay studies or whatever where we've found ourselves surprisingly well equipped without having a section dealing with gay homosexual literature.
But we've
Here, with the late 19th century women authors, we've probably got one of the finest collection, probably the finest lending collection of this material in the entire country.
So people are joining us because it's a subject that universities are anxious to teach and encourage, but they don't have the bibliographical facilities for.
So you've almost become a research-depth facility.
But not even trying.
That's right, yes.
Without trying to do it.
Trying to do your job with just a comprehensive collection.
That's right, yes, oh yes.
And the fact that you don't deaccession material, as so many other libraries are doing.
Yes.
Well, we did, I think in the 1920s, they thinned out the fiction collection.
And I don't know what went then.
Because a lot of our records were lost during the war.
It would be very interesting to know what we had lost then.
And that is why I'm...
I'm very anxious to maintain at least one copy of each title we've had, to perhaps reduce the amount of duplication, because it's amazing what people will want.
However strange it may seem, however dull this stuff is, but there are certain other sections where
We do have material that isn't really appropriate here, because since we were established, other major facilities now exist.
And one would, at research level, would go to, rather than casual reading level, one would go for them for this sort of material.
agricultural cooperation statistics and that sort of thing, where we've got, somebody has given us various statistical annuals, but we've only got a very short run of them.
If you're going to be doing that sort of subject historically, you've got to look at a complete run of those, and there are agricultural, institutes specializing in agricultural historical statistics, where you can get a complete run of it.
And so there are some subjects like that.
But mainstream literature, mainstream history, art history, etc., we've got collections of great strength, which, as you say, have grown to an in-depth research level.
Do you see yourself as a research library?
Well, a library that provides for research.
We don't have the big...
the great in-depth special collection.
We've got very few special collections.
We've had one of the oddities we've got is a large collection of... Can I take your photograph, by the way?
Do you have any?
Yes.
Well, I don't know.
By which I mean no.
Just be casual.
You'll be surprised if I take a picture.
I'll carry on talking about this because it's whatever it was.
Tell me.
The only large special collection we've got is to do with the history of fox hunting.
And it was given to us in the 1950s.
It's obviously, at the moment, especially in England at present, it's a very sensitive subject.
But it is so rich, and it's, I guess, about 3,000 volumes.
periodicals, serials of various kinds.
It's used a great deal by obviously hunting enthusiasts, but it's been used twice in the last 20 years by the two major historians of English fox hunting, Raymond Carr.
Carr did this as a hobby
He's one of the great historians of modern Spain.
But Mr. Oxford Don, he used our collection as the basis for his book.
And Jane Ridley's Social History of English Foxhunting has also been researched there.
And so, you know, there's also a sort of bibliophilic collection of different editions of Omar Khayyar, which is not a particular
importance relevance etc i don't think it's been consulted in years but though i think a fitzgerald scholar might find something there it is you know it's more private collectors thing and um you know the the textual history of the textual evolution of the poem is all settled it's just a number of variant copies illustrating uh well i think it's a frankly illustrating the rather bad taste in which it was printed over the years
Could you tell us something about your collection policy, your acquisitions policy?
Do you have guidelines that you follow?
I think, you know, developing from what you were saying about having become an in-depth research library in spite of general intentions, bearing that in mind, I think we're building on strength, which is...
Look, trying to get a good sense of what we've had in the past and working from there in our various strong subject areas.
Much of the English language acquisitions are done from this office.
That is a selection.
There's an ordering.
There's an ordering department as well, we'll see to it, but booksellers' catalogues are marked up in this time for them.
And we've also got, especially among the cataloguers, we've got language specialists.
And historically, because there were two librarians in the 19th century, both of whom had Russian interests, we've got very strong collections in classical Russian literature.
which have been continued over the years, and very fine collections they are.
I mean, there's great tributes to them from Isaiah Berlin, who was a young man, discovered Alexander Hudson here.
He was looking for a subject when he just became a research fellow at Oxford College, joined us, and just browsing, discovered Hudson, who became one of the
great points of illumination in that distinguished intellectual life.
And so we keep that up.
We've got big French, particularly German, Spanish, Italian, et cetera.
One of my most distinguished predecessors, Sir Charles Hagberg Wright, was the Hagberg bit of his name was actually Swedish.
His mother was
And as a result, you know, for a certain period, we've got rather good Scandinavian collections.
But we don't pursue those in their original language anymore.
But we'll always be looking for translations.
And I recently had a visit from a Danish librarian who was very impressed by what we've got.
I'm sorry.
Roughly how many volumes would you say you require a year?
Do you have a dedicated budget for that?
We've got a dedicated budget, which isn't the same as our expenditure.
I've come to that.
But the number of volumes is round about 7,000 a year, including bound periodicals and that sort of thing.
Some of these come by donation.
Authors give us their own books.
Some by bequest, though we try to be
make arrangements in advance, sort of pre-need arrangements, as they call it at Forest Lawn.
We can talk to people.
What we don't want is people leaving us entire libraries, because well-read libraries of lovers of English literature tend to be very much the same, and of course they're the sort of books we've got already.
So it's best to find out what sort of things people are offering to
stress our particular needs and also to get permission to dispose of unwanted material, which has never been stamped with the library's marks, but we can actually dispose of that for the benefit of the library.
But because of our special position in British literary life in the widest sense, not just
in a London way.
I'd better say something a bit later about the fact that we're not just London Library.
We've got about a quarter of our membership are country members for whom there's a parcel post service.
How about members outside of the UK?
Well, we've got a few outside the UK, but the members' duty to return books on request and to get them back to us speedily obviously means we don't have
people in the USA.
We've got a number of American members, but they tend to be... Friends.
We must have a friends group.
We don't.
I mean, all members are friends in that way.
Well, you don't have friends, which provides some support.
Yes, we've got some financial support through a little body called the International Friends of the London Library, which is recognized as tax-efficient in New York.
But with the...
I'm getting rather confused now.
I've been talking too quickly too long.
Yes.
Before I was talking about... I got rather diverted into that membership.
Yes, right.
I'll get back to it.
Because we are recognised by publishers, and particularly the Publishers' Association, as having a special role in
In British literary life, I mean, from the writing of books through the production of them, editorial, where a great deal of many publishers belong to us as corporate members and use us as their reference library.
And a lot of editorial work, which is increasingly, as in the United States, farmed out to private practitioners.
People don't have actually desks in publishing offices, but will do consultant editorial work.
We've got a continuing role there, everything from the actual creative process to the reviewing process.
And because of this, there is a concession of very, very longstanding, last renewed, I think, in 1952, and I've never, in favorable terms that I've never sought to query, that we are entitled to, oh, no, publishers may offer us
trade terms rather than library terms so that we can actually get discounts of 25, 30% rather than the 10% which until the abolition of retail price maintenance for books was absolutely standard.
It was called the library license, this 10% reduction.
So we're getting an extra 10 or 15%, possibly 20% more
So the amount we spend on our books as the monographs, not our periodicals, is subject to this generous concession.
So we're getting more for our money.
And for the British publications, that is.
And very satisfactory it is.
And it means that the annual budget stretches a little further as a result.
Now you're talking about people who give books.
You aren't necessarily looking for a rare book collection.
No, but of course we've acquired rare books over the years, and many of them have been incorporated into the main series.
And of course, after 150 years running, there are books that have become rare over the years.
And this leads to some difficulties.
I mean, it's possible here still to borrow, say, Trollope First Editions to read.
Now, we lend them out now.
You've got a sign as a guarantee form, recognizing that they have a special value, a replacement value, and that they are rare and costly works.
In fact, these are books that have been rebound two, possibly three times.
To a collector, they have no commercial value at all.
To a scholar, they have a value as
a text as an original text, but by no means in its original condition.
Impossible to find books in this condition now, like that, to get an exact replacement for four times rebound, copy of Family Parsonage, or something like that.
So if somebody loses it, they will have to replace it with one in collector's condition, which is probably going to cost
six or seven hundred pounds, so maybe more now, because of yet another trial of revival.
So it means that we've got to be very careful about our stock in that way, and we're gradually going through it.
The rare books collection is being moved from a unventilated basement store with secure doors, but not good environment, to
a building that we call our Amstruther wing, which is Ian Amstruther, our generous member donor.
And we've got a series of small environmentally improved strong rooms there with mobile shelving.
And we're gradually filling that up.
But it's a slow process moving from the basement in this building to remote parts of the site.
But it's working well.
We've got to clean the books.
We've got to list them while they're shipped from one end to the other.
So we do some basic listing and a cleaning process for which we've got a team of trained volunteers.
Not our own members, but a team of fine arts and fine and decorative art volunteers who... It's a major scheme for quite often retired people who want to do something useful in a cultural way.
They do tapestries in National Trust houses, and there's a small group of them who do books.
So they're working on this at the moment.
And it's a slow process, but we're getting our books repaired, minor repairs, and cleaned on the way.
We're talking about repairs to bindings, etc.
But now, the history of this institution just coincidentally passes through the period, the brittle book period.
Yes, well, what's downstairs are books that are...
mainly books that are valuable because of age.
And so the paper problem is not as acute as it is for the later ones.
Do you do any deacidification?
No, we're not at the moment.
I mean, but we do have books in aesthetically awful condition.
We tend to use surrogate copies, and sometimes we will have the whole thing
Xeroxed and a single electrostatic copy of it done by a bookbinder who specializes in this.
That process understood to be destroying the original, which may not be particularly valuable.
But we fail to find a copy.
And of course, if we do find a copy, it is going to be in similar
poor condition, because the paper will have decayed.
Or it may not look as brown, but it's certainly chemically as brittle as it would have been as our own derelict copy already is.
But I don't think the problem isn't quite as apparent as it is with the temperature extremes of the
East Coast United States, and the particularly poor quality of late 19th century American paper.
I think the amount of pollutants in the wood pulp is just much more than it was in British.
I mean, this is my old experience of looking at
all the American imprints of Carlisle at one stage when I was working in the National Library of Scotland and finding just how extremely brown, cigar-like, the early Boston editions of Carlisle's works were compared with the ones that had been read much more in the main collections in Edinburgh.
Did you have any questions for us?
This is really wonderful.
You know, we were talking about books becoming rare just by the circumstance of acquiring them when they're issued.
At the FNAF, they have a full set of Audubon's Birds of America acquired when it was issued in 18.
Now it's worth several million dollars.
Indeed.
They've got one, too.
at the Providence Avenue.
I believe they do, yes.
Which, you know, dominates.
They've got a rare book room, which is smaller than this, and it has a table in somebody's office in it.
But, I mean, what they do have there is the most enormous cradle, so that they can get their eau de bois out and show it.
I mean, but that, you know, so that, in a sense, could be dominated by that book.
In fact, it's become a minor part of their activities.
They've got...
you know, good general collections, and they're a community library in various ways.
And I was very impressed by them.
I thought that they were able, you know, to keep this pretty little classical building going as a good fiction and biography-lending library.
Charming little children's library there, but just round the corner, you know, in a glass-framed
office.
Here was this, you know, one of the greatest and certainly one of the most expensive books in the world.
You mentioned the Redwood Library in Newport.
I gave a talk to it myself.
I'd never seen that.
It's a charming little building, and this library is in its original building.
Yes, but, yes, I mean, this is not for quotation.
I mean, because, I mean, yes, please don't put this in.
You see, I mean, Providence is provident.
Newport is Newport.
We went there in November, and Newport in November was quite an amazing place because they are so burdened with heritage.
They've got the oldest synagogue in the United States.
They've got the Preservation Society owns, I think, five of those millionaires' cottages.
They've got a marvelous Episcopal church, they've got a yacht museum, they've got a this, they've got a that, and the Redwood is only, and a fine art museum.
The Redwood is a very minor part of this heritage.
I've never heard of it before.
It is.
But they're also having major administrative
nastinesses.
They've got a new librarian at last, but I mean, they lost two after brief periods, and I'm not going to go into that, but I don't know enough about it to go into it.
But, you know, even if they did get a role for themselves as a community library, there is, you know, a civically funded library there, much larger and more efficient already.
So I couldn't see what they're going to do with it.
It's a historic building with books in it, almost.
Whereas the Providence Avenue, well worth a visit sometime if you are in Providence.
45 minutes from Providence.
Yes, I know.
I think that is the way in which one of those tiny libraries can be really sort of vibrant and not just another well-preserved
historic monument.
Briefly, do you have a compact shelving here?
We've got some, yes.
We can't put it in many parts of the building because it's not structurally.
So it's in the basements and in this new wing that we've got.
The Athenaeum, it makes browsing somewhat more... Oh yes, it does.
It's a matter of consenting adults.
Well, I think we've covered the high points, and you have to be good.
Could you, would there be some literature that... Yes, okay.
What I'm going to do is get you a copy of the founders and followers, and some of our recent annual reports as well.
So if we wait just a moment, I'll just go and get... Excellent.
...the lease ran out.
We were able to get rid of that building.
What we've got now is a basement.
preparation room and shop for another Italian cafe, which is a sandwich bar.
We've got a workroom there, and then one, two, three, four, five floors of book storage.
And that's where we put in the rare books.
That's great.
What I was about to ask is, if we request permission to reproduce that painting, how would we go about that?
I think ask through me.
The original, it's done by David Henson for the library's use, but I think if we're actually reproducing it in the book, I think we'd have to ask him.
That's fine, and we'd be willing to do that to pay him his... This is the original, he's just about to go get framed.
I mean, I could take a photograph, but there'd be nothing to come close to.
I mean, a building, that's quite wonderful.
But that's down the road a bit.
Yes, but that's the... Will you ask a question for me?
It's a kind of caption.
It's wonderful.
I think it's absolutely marvellous that, and we've got quite a lot of others of his, but... You know what?
This is our annual Christmas card.
I was just about to say, you should publish that.
Well, we sold $10,000.
Is it for sale out here?
No, I'm afraid not.
We sold out the Monday before Christmas.
We make absolute birthday tickets.
We commission one every year, sometimes humorous.
Can I have a copy of your application form?
Do you have an international friends group?
We do.
We don't actually have a leaflet about them, though.
It's run by an investment man in New York.
and I think the chances of the sacred ship's going to change, so we'll be getting... As you get any information, maybe you could email me or... Certainly.
What I'll do is get you... We sent to the newsletter last year, who is anyone this?
I may just want to write a magazine piece as well and get you a little exposure.
Sir Stephen Runciman, the historian of Rosenthal, who joined at the age of 20, the day after his birthday in 1923.
And this year he's going to be 75 years a life meddler, and we're giving him a special lunch here in the summer.
He's one of our vice presidents, Sir Stephen Runciman.
But they're bound alphabetically.
It's really difficult to... If you've had a prominent one of someone who's deceased, I wouldn't want to take a photograph.